feat: Expand property access in externals (#2425)
software-mansion/TypeGPU: apps/typegpu-docs/src/content/docs/advanced/explaining-the-magic.mdx

```

The externals are not flattened all the way to the end though. There are three most important cases where we stop early:

```ts
const fn = () => {
  'use gpu';
  const a = ext.p1.p2().p3; // 'ext.p1.p2' added to externals
  const b = ext.q1['q2'].q3; // 'ext.q1' added to externals
  const c = ext.r1.$.r3; // 'ext.r1' added to externals
}
```

Stopping at `$` is not necessary in any way for the library to function properly.
However, this lets the library try to auto-name resources that were missed by unplugin autonaming,
while also not affecting the tree-shaking.

#### Step 2: assigning metadata

When the unplugin assigns metadata, the list of externals is turned into an object of thunks:
```ts
const externals = { 
  "ext.p1.p2": () => ext.p1.p2, 
  "ext.q1": () => ext.q1, 
  "ext.r1": () => ext.r1
}
```

There are two important reasons why we need to delay the external computation and cannot just generate entries like `"ext.p1.p2": ext.p1.p2`.

The first reason is externals recapture:
```ts
let buffer;
let pipeline;
const computeFn = tgpu.computeFn({ workgroupSize: [1] })(() => { 
  'use gpu'; buffer.$ += 1; 

> }); // { buffer: buffer } would now become { buffer: undefined }

Author: No, this is an explanation of why we do not do that. With a thunk, this would work.

	}), {
    v: 2,
    name: undefined,
    ast: {"params":[],"body":[0,[[2,[7,"counter","$"],"+=",[7,"incrementBy.allModifier","$"]],[2,[7,[7,"counter","$"],"y"],"+=",[7,"incrementBy.yModifier","$"]]]],"externalNames":["counter","incrementBy"]},
    externals: { "counter": () => counter, "incrementBy.allModifier": () => incrementBy.allModifier, "incrementBy.yModifier": () => incrementBy.yModifier }
  }) && $.f)({}))), "increment"));
	const incrementPipeline = (/*#__PURE__*/(globalThis.__TYPEGPU_AUTONAME__ ?? (a => a))(root.createComputePipeline({ compute: increment }), "incrementPipeline"));
	incrementPipeline.dispatchWorkgroups(1);
	console.log(await counter.read());
}
```

As can be seen, unplugin heavily modifies code around some tgpu elements. 
The changes can be split into three categories:

- auto-naming (`globalThis.__TYPEGPU_AUTONAME__`),
- function metadata assignment (`globalThis.__TYPEGPU_META__`),
- operator overloading (`__tsover_add` and similar).

## Auto-naming

Most TypeGPU resources can be named via the `$name` method.
While this is completely optional, a name can make debugging easier, and it also serves as a primer for identifiers in resulting WGSL.

> Unplugin-typegpu traverses the AST of each bundled file, and matches most common patterns where a default name for a resource (recognized by constructor name) can be inferred.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`unplugin-typegpu` traverses the AST of each bundled file, and matches most common patterns where a default name for a resource (recognized by constructor name) can be inferred.
```

// 	const myConst = tgpu.const(d.u32, 2).$name("incrementValue");
// 	const otherConst = (/*#__PURE__*/(globalThis.__TYPEGPU_AUTONAME__ ?? (a => a))(tgpu.const(d.u32, 2), "otherConst"));
// }
```

The `globalThis.__TYPEGPU_AUTONAME__` function checks its argument for the `$internal` symbol and `$name` prop, and if both are present (and the item does not already have a name), calls `$name` on the item.
Therefore, some potential false positive calls to `__TYPEGPU_AUTONAME__` (e.g. if user named their unrelated function `createMutable`) cause no harm.

It is worth noting that we actually wrap the function in a `(globalThis.__TYPEGPU_AUTONAME__ ?? (a => a))` call: 
we cannot know for sure that TypeGPU was already imported and assigned the autonaming function, so we need a fallback.
This is also the reason why we cannot just export a function like `tgpu.name`.

:::note
Not all resources can be named by the unplugin. 
The most popular case where a name is not assigned is when a resource is returned from a function.
Such resources are named 'item' in the resolved WGSL.
```ts
const createBuffer = () => {
  return root.createBuffer(d.u32);
}
```
:::

## Function metadata assignment

> Function metadata is what makes it possible to parse JS functions into WGSL. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Function metadata is what makes it possible to generate WGSL from JavaScript code. 
```

> The metadata consists of the metadata version, the function name, the AST ([abstract syntax tree](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstract_syntax_tree)), and externals (the captured scope of the function),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The metadata consists of the metadata version, the function name, the AST ([abstract syntax tree](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstract_syntax_tree)), and externals (the captured scope of the function).
```

> Only functions marked with `'use gpu'` are processed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only functions marked with `'use gpu'` are processed, as well as those immediately passed into `tgpu.fn` shells. 
```

### AST

The plugin uses the [tinyest-for-wgsl](https://github.com/software-mansion/TypeGPU/blob/main/packages/tinyest-for-wgsl/README.md) 
package to parse the function AST into our custom AST format called [tinyest](https://github.com/software-mansion/TypeGPU/blob/main/packages/tinyest/README.md).
Our `wgslGenerator` traverses this AST and generates code snippets.

> This could theoretically be done in runtime from the function's `toString`, but it would require bundling a JavaScript parser with TypeGPU, and catching externals would be really difficult.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This could theoretically be done at runtime from the function's `toString`, but it would require bundling a JavaScript parser with TypeGPU, and make catching externals impossible.
```

  const c = ext.r1.$.r3; // 'ext.r1' added to externals
}
```

Stopping at `$` is not necessary in any way for the library to function properly.
However, this lets the library try to auto-name resources that were missed by unplugin autonaming,
while also not affecting the tree-shaking.

#### Step 2: assigning metadata

When the unplugin assigns metadata, the list of externals is turned into an object of thunks:
```ts
const externals = { 
  "ext.p1.p2": () => ext.p1.p2, 
  "ext.q1": () => ext.q1, 
  "ext.r1": () => ext.r1
}
```

There are two important reasons why we need to delay the external computation and cannot just generate entries like `"ext.p1.p2": ext.p1.p2`.

The first reason is externals recapture:
```ts
let buffer;
let pipeline;
const computeFn = tgpu.computeFn({ workgroupSize: [1] })(() => { 
  'use gpu'; buffer.$ += 1; 
}); // { buffer: buffer } would now become { buffer: undefined }
buffer = root.createMutable(d.u32); // externals do not update
```
The same scenario may occur when a function references resources that are recreated (e.g. a resized buffer).

The second reason is the fact that some of our getters depend on the current resolution mode.

> `const.$` returns the value of the const when called outside of resolution, but during resolution it returns a different object with `[$ownSnippet]` and `[$resolve]` symbols.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`tgpu.const` `.$` call returns its value when called outside of resolution, but during resolution it returns a different object with `[$ownSnippet]` and `[$resolve]` symbols.
```

#### Step 3: runtime

> In runtime, the thunks are changed to getters for convenience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At runtime, the thunks are changed to getters for convenience.
```

```ts
const externals = { 
  get "ext.p1.p2"() { return ext.p1.p2 }, 
  get "ext.q1"() { return ext.q1 }, 
  get "ext.r1"() { return ext.r1 } 
}
```

This iteration of externals is still shared between different resolutions of the same function, thus we cannot concretize the externals just yet.

Also, during resolution, deciding whether a given object comes from externals is difficult. Getters let us forget about this problem.
Without this change, the `wgslGenerator` would throw when encountering a function not marked with 'use gpu'.

When the `wgslGenerator` cannot find an identifier in scope, 
it accesses the externals, which return the correct code snippets and automatically add any used definitions to the context, 
as this is the behavior of resource prop access during resolution.

:::caution[Fragility of external prop access]

> There are cases where external prop access performed in during resolution modifies the context.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are cases where external prop access performed during resolution modifies the context.
```

The following code assumes that `helperAccess.$` is actually called in our internals.
This may happen for example if we included the entire prop chain in externals,
and then iterated over external values during resolution.

```ts
const helper = () => {
  'use gpu';
  return 2;
};
const helperAccess = tgpu.accessor(d.u32, helper);

const main = () => {
  'use gpu';
  if (2 + 2 === 5) {
    return helperAccess.$;
  }
  return 0;
};

// This snippet would generate if `resolve` actually executed `helperAccess.$`.
expect(tgpu.resolve([main])).toMatchInlineSnapshot(`
  "fn helper() -> i32 {
    return 2;
  }

  fn main() -> i32 {
    return 0;
  }"
`);
```

This situation can occur even when pruning externals at `.$`:
```ts
const ctx = {
  get helper() {
    return helperAccess.$;
  },
};

// ctx.helper
```

This is the reason why in unplugin we prepend each external with `() =>` 
instead of just prepending the entire object - this lets us only evaluate the externals that were actually used.

:::

## Operator overloading

> For full [tsover](https://github.com/software-mansion/tsover/tree/main) experience, inside the function code, overloaded operators are swapped with calls to functions like `__tsover_add`, defined by [tsover-runtime](https://github.com/software-mansion/tsover/blob/main/packages/tsover-runtime/README.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To allow [tsover](https://github.com/software-mansion/tsover/tree/main) to work as we expect when the function is called in JavaScript, operators used inside the function body are swapped with calls to functions like `__tsover_add`, defined by [tsover-runtime](https://github.com/software-mansion/tsover/blob/main/packages/tsover-runtime/README.md).
```

> This makes it possible to add vectors together without referencing `std.mul` and such.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This makes it possible to add vectors together without referencing `std.add` and such.
```

:::note
This change occurs only in the actual code.
Generated tinyest metadata is not modified.
:::

:::caution

> Unplugin only transforms operators inside of 'use gpu' functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`unplugin-typegpu` only transforms operators inside of 'use gpu' functions.
```
